okay the tape record is running I hope and believe you can probably hear the sounds of the city below there's a whistle it is 7 0 5 p.m.
local time I'm in Alexandria Egypt it is the 27th of October 1998
It is my first full day in Egypt.
I spent the night here last night.
I arrived on a flight from Istanbul to Alexandria, I beg your pardon, to Cairo.
And that story is another one that should be told at another point at another time.
But I took a limousine and we put quotes around that word limousine.
From Cairo here to Alexandria last night, I wrote down the name of my driver, and boy, I do have to go and check it out because he has to be named at some point.
This guy was a pistol.
How fast they drive their cars, I don't know.
I dared to look over his shoulder and to see something in the neighborhood of 130 and 140 miles.
kilometers per hour whatever that is we were easily doing a hundred miles an hour and that's cool I certainly have driven that fast before in my life as my share of speeding tickets will attest but in Egypt there are no rules people dart out in front of your car
If there were lines in the road, they're there merely as stripes of paint.
You come excruciatingly close to other vehicles, to trucks.
I guess you blink your lights.
You beep your horn.
If they curse each other, then it is through some magic individual language of their own that is not discernible to my eyes or to Western eyes.
I don't see screaming flashes of anger.
I did see one pedestrian get hit by a taxi today, and I don't know how serious it was.
I'm looking out now as we speak at the spot where that happened.
I do have to find out the name of this square, this square that faces the Eastern Harbor, where I sit now on the third floor.
of my hotel room, the Metropole Hotel.
It was really an inspiration, a momentary effort.
The word is escaping me right now, but I did something really brilliant by calling the Egyptian Embassy.
because not only did they get me this hotel, but they got me this room, they got me these people, and here I am sitting right now watching children, three children, running around a fountain in that park below.
I can even hear their voices.
Hear them?
Here's the whistle, the taxi cab, and all this hubbub.
There's a huge drink, Coca-Cola, signed in red.
I took a photograph of it today.
It's off to my left.
That huge statue which dominates the square.
Undoubtedly some notable Egyptian of recent vintage.
It is by no means Ozymandias.
He does have a fez on, modern dress.
Looking out towards the sea.
Was I ever reminded today that one does not say the word ocean here?
I misspoke myself twice.
I said the ocean.
And they said the sea, the sea.
And of course the sea out beyond those gates.
And they are gates.
It certainly is a welcoming entranceway.
And now as I look at it, it looks like a giant U. And I'm in the middle of the bottom part of this stroke of this big U. It's a big U. It's as if you raised your two arms above your head.
A big, welcoming... Hear the clop, clop, clop of those horses?
A big U. It's the eastern harbor.
And your arms are reaching upward, outward.
The huge ancient tower of Alexandria would be up to my left.
It would be up to my left, but actually as I sit...
I mean, at my 12 o'clock, straight ahead.
Straight ahead.
The arm would sweep off to my left.
The elbow would be, oh, perhaps a quarter of a mile off to the left.
And then it's a long, straight arc outward.
And there, now, illuminated by lights, is this castle.
We must find the provenance of this castle.
This castle is said to have been constructed from the rubble of the lighthouse, which once stood there.
If this were 2,300 years ago, undoubtedly I would be here right now looking at this giant, this giant structure reaching into the sky.
And instead of the cacophonous sounds of taxis and whistles and the cloppity-clop of horse hoops and the
horns of taxi cabs and the occasional voice in an Arabic language.
There you go.
Instead of those, the sense of sight, instead of the sense of sound, which is what is really at work right now,
in concert with this wonderful panorama.
It is, in fact, a panorama.
I probably would be mesmerized by the sight of this extraordinary tower, which would be climbing up into the sky, belching out smoke, fire, because this is nighttime.
This is when it matters.
This is when those seafarers out there need to know where they're going.
And as I look off, as I see, that little camera's not going to pick up those little lights at night, but I certainly see, as an old naval officer, I know ships underway when I see them.
And I do see out on the horizon the lights of vessels, of ships.
Just imagine.
ancient seafarers bound for Alexandria, using as their landfall that ancient, that magnificent structure, that lighthouse, the phallos, is that what they call it?
Check it out.
Beckoning them here, bringing them here.
And here they would come, and then off to my right, and I would say,
Where I sit, it's my two o'clock.
Yeah, it's my two o'clock.
So then my three is way ahead over here.
Are a couple of vessels.
Put some lights on at night.
They aren't fishing, folks.
But that is where archaeological expeditions are in progress to try and locate the remains of the
ancient city of Alexandria.
And so here I am.
Here I am, sitting here.
And yet, Chef Louis, he said I should come here and feel the magic.
I'm feeling it now.
I didn't feel it earlier today.
What I felt was the heat more than anything else.
As I walked down that promenade, and that's, I guess, what it is, this promenade that goes along the harbor and carries you all the way in here.
to catch this sight where I sit at the moment and see these women in Arab clothing, white headdresses, scarfs over their heads.
And they're all gathered here at this square.
And there is a huge drink Coca-Cola sign
right to the left of the Cecil Hotel.
I guess that would be quite a collectible thing, that drink Coca-Cola.
There is the original Coca-Cola.
I don't even know if we see any of those like that in the States, but that's not great.
Here we are.
The sound of it.
hoinking streetcar and again this is from my room do you believe that among these little plastic advertisements dioramas whatever you want to call them McDonald's seems to have cornered the market here I see a few of these in yellow plastic plates in Arabic of other
advertising other wares, other businesses, other whatever, commercial venues.
But for McDonald's, I can count.
One, two, three, four.
The fifth is a large one, much larger than the others.
Five, that's five, six.
So six out of a total of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
18, one third of these belong to McDonald's.
God bless America.
Hey, why the hell not?
The children are running again around their pool of water.
This is really fascinating.
Boy, I hope you've taken all this up.
And when we think of the nature of this project, of what I'm working on, of what I'm writing, and we think of the preservation of manuscripts, of tapes, of thought, of idea, the preservation of the transmission.
Well, this is a nice little exercise I'm doing now.
Maybe.
And I underscore maybe, maybe I'll listen to this tape before I write the book.
I hope I do, because I think I have good thoughts here, some good vibrations.
But you know, maybe I will, and maybe I won't.
And if I don't... And here we are on October 27, 1998.
I'm 55 years old, working on this book.
Maybe these tapes are important.
I hope they are.
Maybe they're not.
Will anyone ever listen to this?
Boy, if you do... Hey, maybe I'll be around and alive.
That would be kind of cool.
If I am, check it out, whoever you are.
Get in touch with me.
If I still have my wits and my thoughts.
And my arteries haven't clogged.
And my concern extends beyond whatever it is I might be having for lunch that day, whether I have had a good nap.
We have a disease called Alzheimer's.
Who knows?
Or if it's even beyond that.
I'm croaked, I'm dead.
Croaked is a great word in the parlance of today, somebody who died.
Will this little tape survive as a message in a bottle?
Will somebody listen to it?
Will it matter?
Does it matter?
Write it down.
October 27th, 1998.
Are you yelling a blowing whistle?
Is someone else beeping a horn?
You can hear it.
I hope.
The sound of the city, the sound of A-City, the city named for Alexander the Great.
And here I am, perhaps, perhaps, perhaps, near the site of the ancient library, for sure, on this site, you know, take a pic, it was.
But if I were at this spot, on this site, here,
2300 years ago there's no doubt there is absolutely no doubt that I would have seen and I would have in my sight right now that library so that's it and from here it's on to Greece Nick Bazbaines this is Nicholas A. Bazbaines I didn't give you my name my goodness my god
You know, I was assuming all along that this tape would be preserved with all the others.
Let's hope that happens.
What if it doesn't?
What if it's a tape?
Listen, I have to confess something now.
I was at Pergamum three days ago.
Pergamum, the ancient library, the rival library.
To the Alexandrian library.
Well, there, not only do we know precisely where it was, the site is there.
It's marked.
I was in a reading room.
I took photographs.
And as I wrote about 20 minutes ago before I started this tape, I felt the buzz.
Go to my book.
The book is not titled yet.
But whoever you are listening to this, go to that book.
This companion volume to A Gentle Madness.
go to that book I suspect that I will begin on the hills on that mountain in Pergamum and I suspect also that I will conclude right here in Alexandria so while I was there taking photographs getting these impressions working on this theme on these thoughts alright spit it out
I took a piece of marble.
I kneeled down.
There it was, a piece of wonderful marble within the perimeter, in the space, the sacred space of this ancient library.
I had to have this piece of marble.
And I picked that up.
You know, I am not a scavenger.
I am not a thief.
There was a lot of marble there.
There's still a lot of marble there.
But I took this piece of marble to inspire me.
And there's a kind of talisman connection with that ancient structure.
And there was no such similar object to be found to my liking here today.
And I think that what matters here is not the object, the piece of marble, but this experience right here, this sitting.
And I'm going to attempt a photograph, a nighttime photograph of this scene, because not only should it be heard, it should also be seen.
Because here I am.
Well, okay, dear listener.
In the old days, they would say, Dear reader, you are the dear listener.
Listen, if you listen to this, listen, if you listen to this, check me out, will you?
I lived in Massachusetts for most of my life.
I wrote a book that a lot of people liked called A Gentle Madness.
And now...
I believe.
I think I've reached it.
From here I go to Mount Athos in Greece where I'll spend five days.
That's going to be very interesting.
And that will be in this new book.
And who knows, it may surpass us.
It may not.
You never want to rule out anything.
But if I'm around, give me a call.
Get in touch.
Write me a letter.
I have two daughters.
Barbara G. George Berger Bazbaines, Nicole Stella Bazbaines, my wife is funny.
If I'm cloaked, get in touch with them.
Say, listen, I heard your dad's tape.
Tell him what you thought of it.
Come around, and I was more successful than I thought I'd be.
Successful in the same thing doing what I set out to do.
Okay, I'm signing off.
Hey, this is cool.
Gas.
I'm going to go get myself a bite to eat.
Get a ticket on the Torbino to Cairo.
And then it's off to Greece in Mount Athos.
Nick Fasbane saying this has been wonderful.
And signing off right now.
Thank you.
It's about ten minutes later and I've decided to come back on again because I hear more sounds and
I just want to pick up these sounds.
This is really a new experience for me and I guess it's been coming on over the last couple of days.
Normally I go out into the field and I take voluminous notes, I interview people, I take
Dozens of photographs, of which only a few are really any good, but I like it.
I like to cover my sixes, as the fighter pilots used to say, which means to cover your ass, your six being the opposite of your twelve.
But this trip, it's been sounds.
When I was in Pergamum, standing up there on the hill, a thousand feet up there, you could hear
to the left.
You could hear from right in front of you.
You could hear from the right.
You could hear an occasional horn.
When the Muslims start calling their faithful to prayers, that sound just whiffs up from below.
And you hear that sound.
In Ephesus, it was even more extraordinary.
When I was up there on the hill at St.
John's,
And that really breaks me up.
I said, well, I'll just take my camera, take a few pictures, and I left the tape recorder.
Oh, I'm going to kill myself for missing that, as the sounds came from everywhere.
I don't mean to demean it at all, and I'm trying to just kind of make a connection with the sound of calling people to prayer.
It was remarkable.
And here we have sound.
We have sound.
You've got to use, as a writer, as a journalist, as a person who feels, and we use that verb feel to embrace all of the senses, you know, what you see, what you hear.
To a journalist, are the most important things.
What you see and what you hear, what you feel.
But here, in terms of what people say,
Not to the sounds.
The sounds that make up a universe, I guess.
A civilization.
These are random beeps of horns.
Random beeping horns.
Not much of a title there.
But something's coming.
And here we are.
In a big old puddle of water.
Those arms, those big raised arms, like a giant U reaching outward to the Mediterranean Sea.
And off to the left would have been that lighthouse.
Something, baby.
Really something.
Okay, sign-off time once more.
An addendum note, just because I'll be kicking myself in the ass to get it.
The drink Coca-Cola sign is on the roof of what appears to be the Acropoli Hotel.
And we spell that A-C-R-O-P-O-L-E.
Acropoli, like in Acropolis.
Acropoli Hotel.
And from where I sit, that is to the left of the Cecil.
C-E-C-I-L.
Cecil Hotel.
And I'm in a metropole.
Metropole.
Hotel.
And Paradise Bar.
Lest we forget.
Beep.
Okay.
Addendum next.
Yes, my senses have been loosened up a bit by that traveling man's great companion, John Dewar.
And this is an Arab country.
And I have a mini bar.
Hmm.
I smell something.
Wow.
Something's cooking out there, folks.
It kind of smells like popcorn, but I can't believe they have popcorn here in Alexandria.
It's charcoal, definitely.
Good.
Oh, nice.
Mini bar.
Oh, yeah.
Well, in my mini bar, we have non-alcoholic beers.
You can't get a drink here to bust your ass.
I mean, it's tough.
So, thankfully, I did bring a jug with me.
It's not John Doerr, but it is Valentine, and I just finished it off, and it has helped me here tonight.
A little bit, you know, a little balm for the soul, a little loosener-upper.
Something to have to un-glib the goodness.
And I think I probably said more than I ought to.
All right, see you.
Bye-bye.
Another addendum.
I'd like to say the final one.
But one never knows, do one.
I think it's very important to the setting.
I described where I am and I gave you the time and the date.
I don't know if I gave you the time, but it is nighttime.
It is nighttime.
The photographs I took today were in piercing daylight.
And here we are in nighttime.
And so the water is black.
the the little the arms of whatever we call these perimeters of the harbor which stretch out above our head here going out towards this U are pierced by lights yellowish lights street lights whatever
And the water is just black.
It must have been apparent in what I said because I think I did indicate I could see the ships way out there on the horizon as I can still see them with just their little lights blinking away.
And the old seaman's eye is not as good as it used to be, but I would estimate, oh, 10 miles, 10 miles on the horizon.
And there was kind of a searchlight doing a little sweep
A little sweep right to left, coming my way, approximately where the ancient lighthouse would be.
I think the ancient lighthouse would be far more dramatic.
But this one does the job, I suppose, and we have Moran and we have satellite fixes.
We have all kinds of other ways to determine location, direction.
I wish we had them for people.
Nick out once more.
You know, as I sit here, I'm reminded of Prospero's epilogue in The Tempests.
Our revels now are ended.
These are actors, as I foretold you, are all spirits and are melted into air, into thin air.
And like the baseless fabric of our vision,
the cloud-capped towers the gorgeous temples boy i missed a phrase here but yea the great globe itself are melted and are vanished into thin air we are but stuff as dreams are made of and our little life is rounded with the sleep well i that up i think in a huge way and that is not the epilogue that's prosperous
our rebels now, our ended speech.
He epilogues like something else.
Um, but that's pretty good too.
That's where he begs forgiveness.
And he said, as you from crimes would pardon me, may your indulgence set me free.
Hmm.
I love that too.
This is very important.
Um,
I'm in room 312 of the Metropole Hotel.
And I say it's important because of all the hotels, for all the hotels I've stayed in over the years, I've been a writer and a journalist and a researcher, I've always felt that you retain important information.
And if you're really good, you retain it forever, you know, for as long as your brain functions to be that extraordinary
an effably perfect machine that it is but i know one thing that's helped me get along is that well for as long as i'm in a hotel room in any city in any state in any country of the world well i know i remember the number just as i mentioned a few seconds ago room 312 well i know it's room 312
What room was I in in the Astor Hotel in Athens a week ago?
I don't have a clue.
What's the number of the hotel I was in in Izmir?
That was just yesterday morning when I checked out.
Well, yeah, I do remember that.
That was 1310, because it's still pretty close.
That's still within 24 hours.
I just really tried hard to remember.
Well, here comes an ambulance.
It becomes the sound of someone else's misery.
Someone is having a very bad day.
And so we think about that person.
Yeah, well, I think being in room 312 is pertinent to this colloquy monologue.
It's not a colloquy.
Because I just looked down to the ground, and when I look at the photograph, I'm right above the street light.
There's only one street light in front of the Metropole Hotel.
And above the awning, I go up three levels.
One, two, three.
When you see the photograph, all of these shutters will be closed.
But now my end is open, and I'll bet it's the only one in the whole hotel is open.
It's open at the moment, looking out on this.
a good air conditioning system you close the inner doors and and you essentially shut out these sounds and you shut out that heat although it's not hot now in fact there's a nice mediterranean breeze kind of floating in through the open arms of that big giant view out there and it's quite comfortable and quite nice
It is now 8 p.m., or approximately so, five minutes prior to that hour.
And this is where I am, room 312, Metropole Hotel in Alexandria.
Quite a very interesting night.